in lecture we're not gonna see the
entire implementation of what a heat
might look like but let's get some
insight and in lab 9 you'll get a chance
to do it yourself so the first thing I'm
going to do is talk about general
approaches to implementing trees in Java
or in other programming languages so
proach 1a is going to be the most
natural thing imagine I have a tree
which has W as the root and XY and Z as
its children so as many ways we could
represent this tree but the most natural
approach is something like what you've
done in the past this first approach
tree 1a in this approach which is a
naked recursive tree we have a key with
a key memory box called K and then we
have three memory boxes for the left
middle and right child so in this case
if we look at this diagram we have W any
left memory lay a left memory box that
points at the left subtree a middle
memory box that points at the middle
subtree and a right memory box that
points at the right subtree and that
right there gives us a tree now you
might say Josh are we talking bout heaps
why why we have a 3-way tree all of a
sudden well the goal here is simply to
say there are many ways to represent
trees not just the way you've done in
the past now this is the approach you
used with BST Maps you've probably used
in the past but there are other ways we
can do this so let me show an alternate
approach I'll call this tree one be in
tree one be by contrast we have instead
of a link a set of links directly to our
children like hardwired links we instead
have a memory box that stores the
location of an array of links to
children so here we have tree our two
instance variables our key K and we have
tree one B which is going to be an array
sorry array of tree would be children so
this memory block could give us a link
to an array of children so this approach
well what's good about it it lets us in
theory have array of how many children
we want we could have some kind of
heterogeneous tree where some of the
nodes have like eight children at some
f2 and that will give us more
flexibility but the downside is that our
code will be a little more awkward and
our performance will be a little worse
because to get to a child we have to
follow two links instead of just one
link now you get another stranger
approach is what I'll call approach 1c
in this approach we notice that W have
tooth has two memory boxes one that
points to one of its children and the
null X its leftmost child
it has pointer off to whoever its child
is and also pointing pointer to its
sibling Y and then Y has a similar deal
where it points that its siblings E and
so we end up with this tree which I call
a sibling tree so this sibling tree
approach is another way that we could
have heterogeneous trees a little
different than what we had before and
this approach you might figure well
let's maybe think of what the instance
variables are so we have this first link
which seems to be to a child and the
other one is to a sibling and so maybe
we'll call this one we gotta think of an
instance variable name I picked a
favorite kid or you know a favorite
child
okay so that's what our instance
variables are claimed and this also
works so all three of these approaches
are pretty natural right they all give
us some mapping from our node to our
children we store explicit references to
who is below us now there's actually
more exotic approaches where you don't
extort the dote store explicit
references and we've actually already
seen one of those when we did the
destroyed sets data structure so in this
case we'll call this approach to an
approach to will store our keys in an
array and we'll also store an array of
parent IDs so for example here again we
have the exact same tree W has three
children
x y&z so we have a keys array which
consists of W the next then Y then C and
we have the parents array where the 0th
entry of that array is well it says what
the parent of 0 is so 0 is paired to 0
meaning W is the route and 1 2 and 3
also have parent 0 meaning they're all
children of W now that's a pretty boring
tree so I've got a more complicated one
at the bottom in this case I've got a
complete tree that looks like ke V beak
gpy ADF J and so forth
and so my keys array is ke V BGP Y and
my parents array is well in this case we
say ok well as threes parent threes
parent is 1 and one's parent is 0 12
parent is 5 5 s parent is tutus parent
is Sara so 12 parent is 5 5 s parent is
2 two's parent is 0 and so this is one
way to represent this tree now this is
not the only way I mean we could
scramble these in some order and change
all the parents to match but if we store
keys in the order shown and the tree is
complete it turns out that we'll always
have this property that the parents are
rail is extremely boring it will always
go 0 0 1 1 two 2 three 3 four 4 five 5
six so in approach 3 which will be our
strangest approach and maybe if you're
on following pause the video make sure
this really makes sense because that's
about to take a strange leak okay this
is just like what we did with disjoint
sets and so approach 3 is to recognize
that if we're storing a complete tree
and we store the keys in the order just
reading it top to bottom which is also
known as the level order by the way in
that case we can actually discard the
parents array completely and in this
case the keys to Ray is exactly as
before and this will only work for
complete trees right because the whole
the whole idea here is we assume that
the tree is complete then the parents
array is actually redundant and so we
could ignore it okay so tree 3 is a
nicer approach where our tree is
represented as an array okay so it seems
a little crazy right that you can take a
structure which is not at all
one-dimensional right a tree is - it's a
you have this whole hierarchical
structure but instead we reduced into
this flat line right it's just it's kind
of amazing I think it's very clever
so to make sure that that'll make sense
I have a little puzzle for you here I
want you to write the parent K method
for this code now what is this guy this
could actually shows what swim would
look like in the implementation of a
heap so if I want to swim in my tree the
cave item so let's say I want to swim
this p here in location 5 then I'll say
ok well if the key element of the keys
array in the parent position so the
parent of K parent of 5 is 2 then what
we'll do is we'll say this number is if
V is greater than keys 5 then we would
swap 2 and 5 and then we would call swim
on this parent so your job now is to try
and write this parent method that's
gonna be really short it's gonna take as
input an integer and it's going to
return an integer corresponding to the
parent so for 5 it should return 2 for
13 it should return six and so forth so
give you guys a short time to think
about that and I will spoil it in the
next little bit okay so what I came up
with and what's the answer is if we
subtract one and divide by two this is
the easiest way to do it now you could
do it with some kind of if statements
but this takes advantage of the way that
Java rounds down integer division so for
example if I do 5 minus 1 that's 4
divided by 2 I get 2 and if I have 6
minus 1 I get 5 and 5 divided by 2 is
2.5 and that gets rounded down to 2
likewise anywhere else the key insight
is to realize that for every node there
is exactly two children so for 4 it's
nine and ten for two it's five and six
for six it's 13 and 14 and so parent
should always work properly so we check
for 1 so 1 minus 1 is 0 divided by 2 and
that gives me 0 there's actually one
tiny bug here which said if we take
actually let's check and see if it's a
bug if we take 0 we subtract 1 we get
minus 1/2 that's minus 0.5 I actually
don't know if it works for 0 but I'll
leave it as an exercise to the reader
just kind of a funny thing I thought
about ok because ideally the parent of 0
should also be 0 and so mmm my knowledge
of Java is lacking to know we can look
it up later I won't do it now so two
representations right we have 1a 1b and
1c those are all pretty standard 2 was a
little stranger but we saw with disjoint
sets and 3 takes advantage that of the
fact that our tree is actually complete
and this is typically what's done in
real life
keep implementations because it's going
to be very fast we don't have to follow
any links and to the code actually ends
up being quite simple a little strange
maybe but certainly quite simple